Welcome back to the course, in this lecture
we will learn about some of the types of graphs
and some of the terminology used in graph
theory, to have some basics before we start
studying algorithms.
The main two types of graphs are the undirected
graph and the directed graph, you really need
to understand these because you will hear
about them a lot.
Both of these types of graphs still follow
the concept of having vertices that are connected
with edges, the difference between them remains
in the nature of the edges.
In an undirected graph, edges don't have a
particular direction, it's a two-way relationship
between the two vertices, we can go from vertex
A to vertex B and vice versa.
An example of that is friendship in Facebook,
if there is an edge between two people it
means that they're friends, green is friend
with blue and blue is friend with green, it's
reciprocal.
But in a directed graph, also called digraph,
an edge has a particular direction, you can
see that it has a tail and a head.
And here the direction matters, we can go
from A to B but we cannot go from B to A.
An example of that is following on Twitter.
If we have two people green and blue and there
is an edge like this, it means that green
follows blue, but the opposite isn't true
here.
Here the edge has a defined direction, it
goes from green to blue, so green follows
blue, it's a one-way relationship.
Another quick example to better understand
the two types, we can mention family relationships.
For example if we have a graph where an edge
represents sibling relationship, then we use
an undirected graph, because if A is a sibling
of B then B is also a sibling of A, it's a
two-way relationship.
But if we have a graph where an edge represents
father-son relationship, we use a directed
graph, because it's a one-way relationship,
if A is the father of B, it doesn't mean that
B is a father of A, it's even impossible in
this example.
We also need the direction to determine who's
the father and who's the son, for example
here A is the father and B the son.
But if we reverse the edge, B becomes the
father and A the son.
Another major difference between undirected
and directed graphs is in traversal, later
when we will learn how to traverse a graph,
we will see that in an undirected graph, we
can jump from this vertex A to the vertex
B, but we can also jump from the vertex B
to the vertex A, it's permissible.
However, in a directed graph, if an edge goes
out from A and goes in to B, we can only jump
from A to B, not the other way around, it's
like an arrow that shows us what direction
we can take.
Now that you hopefully understood undirected
and directed graphs, we can move to the next
types: unweighted and weighted graphs.
In the previous lecture, we've talked about
the example of finding the shortest path between
two vertices.
If you noticed, there was an integer on each
edge of the graph, that integer represents
the distance between two vertices.
In a more general way, that value represents
the weight of the edge.
You've guessed it, a weighted graph is a graph
where we associate a weight to each edge,
that weight can represent a cost, a distance,
a speed limit, it depends on the purpose of
the graph.
And an unweighted graph is just a graph with
no weight on its edges, like the one we've
seen in the car rides example, an edge simply
meant that two car rides overlap, that's it,
we don't need to add a weight to it.
Now you know undirected and directed graphs,
unweighted and weighted graphs, important
point, a graph being directed or undirected
is independent from being weighted or unweighted,
so we have undirected unweighted graphs, undirected
weighted graphs, directed unweighted graphs,
and directed weighted graphs.
Let's move to the next point.
A first two terms that we will learn about
are adjacent and incident.
Two vertices are said to be adjacent if there
is an edge connecting them, these two vertices
A and B are adjacent.
And a vertex is said to be incident to an
edge if it's one of the two vertices it connects,
here there is an incidence between the vertex
A and the edge, also an incidence between
the vertex B and the edge.
Next term, an important one: degree.
The degree of a vertex is the number of edges
the vertex is incident to, denoted deg(v).
For example the degree of the vertex A is
3, here are degrees of remaining vertices
to better understand.
For an undirected graph, a vertex is incident
to all the edges in a same way, there is no
need to further definitions.
But in a directed graph, the edge it has an
incidence with can be going out of the vertex,
or going in the vertex.
So a vertex can have edges going out of it,
their total number is named the out-degree,
and it can also have edges going in it, their
total number is named the in-degree.
In other words, the out-degree of a vertex
is the number of edges that start from it,
denoted deg superscript + (v), and the in-degree
of a vertex is the number of edges that end
in it, denoted deg superscript - (v).
And the degree of a vertex in a directed graph
is the sum of its out-degree and its in-degree.
Here is an example, you can see that the vertex
B has 3 edges going out of it, edges that
start from it, this is why its out-degree
is 3.
And it has 1 edge going in it, 1 edge that
ends in it, this is why its in-degree is 1.
We can say that its degree is 4, 3+1, remember
that its the sum of the out-degree and the
in-degree.
And here are out-degrees and in-degrees of
remaining vertices.
Speaking of degree, we can have vertices with
a degree of 0, they're not connected with
any other vertex.
Such vertices are named isolated vertices,
an isolated vertex is a vertex with degree
zero, like the vertex I in this example.
Next terms are order and size, easy ones,
the order of a graph is its number of vertices
and the size of a graph is its number of edges.
For example this graph has an order of 6 and
a size of 8.
Next term, self-loop.
A self-loop, also named loop, is an edge that
connects a vertex to itself, like in this
example.
Question now, can we have multiple edges between
the same two vertices?
The answer is yes, but we need to do the distinction
between two types of graphs: simple graphs
and multigraphs.
Simple graphs are graphs that allow neither
multiple edges between the same two vertices
nor self-loops.
And multigraphs are graphs that allow multiple
edges between the same two vertices, and for
self-loops, some authors say that they're
allowed and some others say that they're not.
And we will usually work with simple graphs,
in this course you can assume that a graph
is simple unless it's mentioned that it's
a multigraph.
We also have other types of graphs you should
know about, first we have the trivial graph,
a graph with only one vertex and no edges.
We also have the edgeless graph, a graph with
any number of vertices but with 0 edges.
We also have the complete graph, a graph where
there is an edge between each two pair of
vertices, denoted Kn where n is the order
of the graph.
We also have the star graph, a graph where
we have one vertex of degree n-1 and n-1 vertices
of degree one, in other words, a vertex that
is connected to all other vertices, and all
other vertices are connected to that vertex
only.
I know that you're discovering a lot of new
terms quickly and it may be overwhelming,
but you will still be able to have a look
at them again later in case you forget something,
don't worry.
Another type of graph is the bipartite graph.
A bipartite graph is a graph whose the set
of vertices can be partitioned into two sets
of vertices such that there is no edge between
two vertices of the same subset.
For example this graph is bipartite, because
if we partition vertices this way, there is
no edge between any two vertices of V1, and
same thing for V2.
A real life example is players and clubs,
let's suppose that we have players and clubs
that we want to represent in a graph where
an edge from A to B means that the player
A played in the club B.
The graph that we get is bipartite, because
we can partition the vertices into a subset
V1 that represents players and a subset V2
that represents clubs.
And we can't have an edge between vertices
of V1 because a player can't play in a player,
same thing for V2, a club can't play in a
club, the relationship can only be between
a player and a club.
A special type of bipartite graphs is complete
bipartite graphs.
A complete bipartite graph is a bipartite
graph where every vertex of V1 is connected
to every vertex of V2, like in this graph.
A complete bipartite graph is denoted Km,n
where m is the number of vertices of V1 and
n the number of vertices of V2.
Next type of graphs is the regular graph,
it's a graph where all vertices have the same
degree, as you can see here.
For directed graphs, a directed regular graph
must also satisfy the condition of having
the out-degree equal to the in-degree for
each vertex.
Then we have two important terms: sparse and
dense.
A graph is said to be sparse if its number
of edges is small, much less than the total
possible number of edges, like this one.
And a graph is said to be dense if its number
of edges is big, close to the total possible
number of edges, like this one.
Last two subjects we will talk about in this
lecture are terms related to subgraphs and
terms related to paths and cycles, we're almost
done.
What if we have a graph G and we create a
new graph G' by taking some vertices and some
edges from G.
This is what we call a subgraph!
G'=(V',E') is a subgraph of G=(V,E) if and
only if V' is a subset of V, E' is a subset
of E, and incident vertices of every edge
in E' are in V', in other words, we cannot
take an edge from G without taking its two
incident vertices.
In math notation it's written that if an edge
(u, v) is in the subgraph, then both u and
v must be in the subgraph, for example we
cannot take the orange edge without taking
0 and 3.
Two special kinds of subgraphs are spanning
subgraphs and induced subgraphs.
A spanning subgraph of G is a subgraph of
G where we take all the vertices and possibly
remove some edges.
Look at the example, we took all vertices
of G and removed some edges.
And an induced subgraph of G is a subgraph
of G where we can remove some vertices, but
we take all the edges, except ones that are
incident to vertices we removed obviously,
so the set of edges contains all edges of
E whose vertices are in the subgraph.
In the example we removed 2 vertices and kept
all edges, except the ones that are incident
to vertices we removed.
And the opposite of subgraph is supergraph,
if we take a graph G and add to it some vertices
and/or some edges, we would have created a
supergraph of G.
We can say that if G' is a subgraph of G then
G is a supergraph of G'.
Last topic now: terms related to paths and
cycles.
First of all, you need to understand what
is a walk.
A walk is a sequence of edges that connects
a sequence of vertices, basically you can
think of it as a line that traverses vertices.
Obviously, each vertex it traverses has to
be adjacent to the next one.
And a walk, can have repeated vertices and/or
repeated edges, for example in this walk we
have repeated vertices, J and D, and a repeated
edge, the one between J and D. By repeated
vertex we mean a vertex that we pass from
more than once, and same logic for edge, a
repeated edge is an edge that we pass from
for more than once.
And we have two types of walks: open walks
and closed walks.
An open walk is a walk where the first vertex
and the last vertex are different, like this
one.
And a closed walk is a walk where the first
vertex is equal to the last vertex, like this
one.
Basically it's a walk that goes back to where
it started.
Now you know about walks, you still need to
know about trails, circuits, paths, and cycles.
A trail is simply a walk that doesn't allow
repeated edges.
For example this one is a trail, this one
is a trail, but this one is not, it contains
a repeated edge, the one between J and D.
A circuit is simply a closed trail, a trail
whose the first and the last vertices are
equal, like this one.
And a path, is a walk, that doesn't allow
repeated edges but also vertices this time.
For example this one is a path, this one is
not a path because it has a repeated vertex,
and same thing for this one, not a path.
We also have the concept of cycle, very important.
A cycle is a closed path, a path where the
first and last vertex are the same.
Even if it doesn't respect the condition of
having no repeated vertices, but an exception
is made for the first and last vertex, so
a cycle is a walk with no repeated edges,
no repeated vertices, except for the first
and last one.
The definitions we've seen now also have their
directed version, for directed graphs, we
have directed walk, directed closed walk,
directed trail, directed circuit, directed
path, and directed cycle.
The difference is that we have to respect
the direction of the edges, for example this
one is a directed path because all edges are
in the same direction, but this one is not,
because of this edge.
Even if vertices are adjacent, but the direction
isn't respected.
Basically each ending vertex of an edge must
be the starting vertex of the next edge.
And from definitions we've seen now we discover
two new types of graphs, cyclic and acyclic
graphs.
An undirected cyclic graph is an undirected
graph that contains a cycle, like this one,
one of its cycles is the orange one.
And obviously, an undirected acyclic graph
is an undirected graph that doesn't contain
a cycle, like this one.
For directed graphs, a directed cyclic graph
is a directed graph that contains a directed
cycle, like this one, an example of a cycle
inside it is the one in orange.
And a directed acyclic graph, DAG, is a directed
graph that doesn't contain a directed cycle,
like this one.
Last three terms: reachable, connected, and
disconnected.
We say that a vertex B is reachable from a
vertex A if there exists a path from A to
B. For example here we can go from A to B,
so B is reachable from A. For connected, we
say that a graph is connected if there exists
a path between every pair of vertices, which
is the case in this one.
But for this one for example, we don't have
a path between A and E, hence the graph is
not connected, we say that it's disconnected.
This one is for undirected graph, because
for directed graphs, we have weakly connected
and strongly connected.
Weakly connected graph means that there exists
an undirected path from each vertex to each
vertex, an undirected path is a path that
doesn't take edges direction into consideration.
In other words, if we remove edges direction,
we get a connected undirected graph.
And for strongly connected, there must be
a directed path from each vertex to each vertex,
here we take edges direction into consideration.
For example this graph is weakly connected
but not strongly connected, because there
is no directed path from A to C. But this
one is strongly connected, we have a directed
path from any vertex to any vertex.
And we finished this lecture where we introduced
a lot of terms and types of graphs.
I know that you had to understand a ton of
new concepts quickly and that this lecture
wasn't that fun, but as said earlier, you
will be able to go back to them again later
if you forget something.
Also, you will have a quiz where you will
be able to evaluate yourself and see if you
understood what we talked about in this lecture.
Okay now we know what is a graph, some of
its types, but an important question comes
in mind, how is a graph represented in the
memory of our computer?
This is what we will talk about in our next
lecture.
I hope that you understood this one, and see
you in the next lecture!